Swimming is the self-propulsion of a person through water, usually for recreation, sport, exercise, or survival. Swimmers achieve locomotion by coordinating limb and body movements to achieve a level of buoyancy and hydrodynamic thrust that results in directional motion. For example, they float to a greater or lesser extent, and move in a given direction by coordinating their forward thrusting actions, especially of their head and torso, with other actions such as stroking with their arms and kicking with their legs. Swimming is a whole body exercise that requires endurance, skill and efficient techniques to maximize speed and minimize energy consumption.
Swimming is consistently among the top public recreational activities, and in some countries, swimming lessons are a compulsory part of the educational curriculum.  It offers numerous health benefits, such as strengthened cardiovascular health, muscle strength, and increased flexibility. It is suitable for people of all ages and fitness levels. As a formalized sport, swimming is featured in various local, national, and international competitions, including every modern Summer Olympics.
Swimming involves repeated motions known as strokes to propel the body forward. While the front crawl, also known as freestyle, is widely regarded as the fastest of the four main strokes, other strokes are practiced for special purposes, such as training.
Swimming comes with many risks, mainly because of the aquatic environment where it takes place. For instance, swimmers may find themselves incapacitated by panic and exhaustion, both potential causes of death by drowning. Other dangers may arise from exposure to infection or hostile aquatic fauna. To minimize such eventualities, most facilities employ a lifeguard to keep alert for any signs of distress.
Swimmers often wear specialized swimwear, although depending on the area's culture, some swimmers may also swim nude or wear their day attire. In addition, a variety of equipment can be used to enhance the swimming experience or performance, including but not limited to the use of swimming goggles, floatation devices, swim fins, and snorkels.