Diabetes mellitus, commonly known as diabetes, is a group of common endocrine diseases characterized by sustained high blood sugar levels. Diabetes tends to progress in severity, and is due to either a reduced production of the hormone insulin by the pancreas or unresponsiveness of bodily cells to insulin's effects. Classic symptoms include the three Ps: polydipsia (excessive thirst), polyuria (excessive urination), and polyphagia (excessive hunger), together with weight loss and blurred vision. If left untreated, the disease can lead to many health complications, including disorders of the cardiovascular system, eye, kidney, and nerves. 
The major types of diabetes are type 1 and type 2. The most common type is type 2. The most common treatment for type 1 is insulin replacement therapy (insulin injections), while anti-diabetic medications (such as metformin and semaglutide or tirzepatide) and lifestyle modifications can be used to manage type 2. Gestational diabetes, a form that sometimes arises during pregnancy, normally resolves shortly after delivery. Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune condition in which the body's immune system attacks the beta cells (β-cell) in the pancreas, preventing the production of insulin. This condition typically is present from birth or develops early in life. Type 2 diabetes occurs when the body becomes resistant to insulin, meaning the cells do not respond effectively to it, and thus, glucose remains in the bloodstream instead of being absorbed by the cells. Additionally, diabetes can result from other specific causes, such as genetic conditions (monogenic diabetes syndromes like neonatal diabetes and maturity-onset diabetes of the young), diseases affecting the pancreas (such as pancreatitis), or the use of certain medications and chemicals (such as glucocorticoids or other specific drugs, including those used after organ transplantation).
The number of people worldwide diagnosed as living with diabetes has increased sharply in recent decades, from 200 million in 1990 to 828 million in 2024. Diabetes accounts for some two million deaths each year, and more than half of those affected are unaware of their condition. It affects one in seven of the adult human population, with type 2 diabetes accounting for more than 95% of cases. These numbers have already risen beyond earlier projections of 783 million adults by 2045. The prevalence of the disease continues to increase, most dramatically in low-middle income nations, where it is now the seventh leading cause of death. Rates are similar in women and men. The global expenditure on diabetes-related healthcare is an estimated US$760 billion a year.